- Well, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Hello, yeah, excited to be here, Michael.
I've been listening to Talk Python for,
I can't even remember how long,
but I'm pretty sure it was before I had a first Python job.
So, yeah, a long, long time.
- Oh, that's amazing.
Well, now you're helping create it.
It's amazing.
- Yeah, exactly.
No, yeah, super excited to be on, Chad Colo.
- Yeah, we're gonna talk about Colo,
your Visual Studio Code Django,
I don't even know what to call it.
It's pretty advanced, pretty in-depth.
Extension seems to be not quite enough.
So, what any project, people are gonna really dig that,
people who Django, and we'll see what the future plans are.
We could talk you into other ones,
but for now, Django plus VS Code
is gonna be super interesting.
Before we get to that, of course,
you must know the drill.
Tell us a bit about yourself.
- Yeah, for sure.
So, my name is Will.
I've been using Django since,
well, I guess I've been using Python since about 2013,
I wanna say, so a little over 10 years.
And yeah, just kind of like fell in love with it,
wanted to make websites, started using Django.
And yeah, I guess never really looked back.
That was in school back then,
but kind of always had a love for tinkering
and building side projects.
I actually studied, did a management degree in university,
but I really loved hanging out
with all the computer science kids,
all the computer science students.
And I think a part of me really wanted to impress them.
So, I was always building side projects.
And one of them was actually a Slack app called SimplePol.
And yeah, we were trying to organize something in Slack
and really felt like the need for polls.
So, built this little side project,
just like during university.
And then it became really, really popular.
And a few years later, it became my full-time job.
So, for the past- - No kidding, that's awesome.
- Yeah, four years, I've been running SimplePol
as a Slack app, building out the team
up to like seven, eight of us.
And yeah, had a great time doing that.
In the middle, I actually worked at GitHub for two years,
working on Ruby and Rails.
And that was super fun, like a great company,
great people, huge code base.
Learned a lot there.
That was really fun.
But yeah, I left after about two years
to work full-time on SimplePol.
So, SimplePol had been running as a side project
kind of in the background.
And actually, it's interesting,
like I think kind of the order of events,
thinking back, Microsoft acquired GitHub while I was there.
And then suddenly, all of my colleagues
started talking about buying boats and leaving the company.
(both laughing)
And I thought, hmm, I don't quite have boat money,
but how can I, what's an ace I might have up my sleeve?
And it was SimplePol, which had got like tons of users,
but I never monetized it.
So I set out to monetize it.
And then a year later, it was actually bringing
in more revenue than my salary at GitHub.
So I decided to quit.
So that's kind of the SimplePol backstory.
So SimplePol's a Django app, reasonably sized now,
bunch of people working on it.
And then yeah, at some point in the journey
of building SimplePol,
I kind of started playing around with Colo.
So Colo also kind of, just like SimplePol,
started as a side project,
but now not to make polls in Slack,
but instead to improve my own developer experience
building SimplePol.
So kind of built it as my own tool for making Django,
yeah, working with Django more fun, give me more insight,
give me access to some of the data that I felt was so close,
but that I had to just like manually get in there
and print out.
So the reasons Colo started out as supporting just Django
and VS Code is because that's what I was using.
And it was an internal side project.
And yeah, and now actually handed over SimplePol
to a new CEO.
I'm no longer involved day to day
and I'm working full-time on Colo.
- Man, congratulations on like multiple levels.
That's awesome.
- Thank you.
- Yeah, I wanna talk to you a bit about SimplePol
for just a minute, but before then,
you pointed out like, look, I made this side project
and how many hours are you spending on it?
A week maybe?
- Oh, it was interesting.
So honestly, like, so this would like right at the beginning,
like when it was first started.
Yeah, it's a good question.
I always joke that the best thing
about my management degree was that I had a lot of free time
to like do build side projects.
Honestly, I think it could have been like 20, 30,
40 hours a week.
Yeah, that was, yeah, it could have, I think, yeah,
it definitely varied week to week.
- And then later on?
- And then, yeah, and then while I was working,
but I had a full-time job as a software engineer.
Yeah, that was a lot tougher.
It was like nights and weekends,
rarely had energy during the week to work on it.
And then honestly, like, since it was a real project
with real users, I ended up spending a lot
of the weekend doing like support.
- It's like support stuff, yeah, absolutely.
- Support, and like, then you charge,
and then now you have finance stuff and like legal stuff.
So that wasn't super fun.
- It really slows down the features
and the creation of stuff, doesn't it?
Yeah, I would say I probably spent fully 50%
of my full-time job doing email support,
that kind of stuff, you know, just like,
there's tons of people taking courses
and listening to podcasts, and they'll have questions
and thoughts and, you know, and it's awesome,
but it also is really tricky.
So the reason I ask is I always find it fascinating.
You'll see like news articles, I don't know,
they're always click baity or whatever.
This person makes three times their job working 10 hours
a week on this other thing.
Like you make three times what you make for your job.
What are you doing at your job?
(laughing)
- Right, and just the ability to say,
you could make that step where you go from
kind of tired at nights, extra time,
and squeezing on the weekends to full-time, full energy.
- Yeah.
- If it's already doing well, you know,
on like a very thin life support,
like then give it full time and energy.
It's just, of course it's gonna be better, right?
- Yeah, it's so interesting.
I actually have a lot of thoughts about this.
Maybe I should write something about this at some point,
but yeah, I actually think running like a bootstrap
side project kind of business as you have a job
can be really good because it really forces you
to prioritize and build the most important things.
- Yeah, it's kind of like having kids.
- Oh, nice, yeah, yeah.
I need to try that someday.
(laughing)
- Oh, you'll be real tired, I tell you.
You'll love to prioritize your time.
(laughing)
That's awesome.
- No, yeah, I think it really forced you to prioritize.
So I actually sometimes recommend when folks ask me
like for advice, like should I quit my job
to go all in or not?
I actually sometimes think there's a lot of nice stability
and that comes from having a job plus.
It's actually really nice to have coworkers.
It's nice to have structure.
Like you actually need to take all of that,
well, work in a way on yourself.
Like it's, you know, if you have to make your own structure,
like if you're building your own thing
and that can actually be a bit tricky.
Like I really struggled with that at the beginning.
So I think there's something to be said for,
yeah, for working on,
yeah, for spending like limited time on something basically
and prioritizing just the most important.
- That's an interesting angle
and I don't necessarily disagree with that.
It's interesting.
- Yeah, and then also I think,
so for me it was interesting,
like in terms of like how much,
like, you know, life support energy you put in
versus like full-time energy.
I was growing decently, like while I was still at GitHub
and I thought, okay, I'm gonna go in on this full-time.
And if I go from like 10 hours a week or less
to like 40 hours a week,
that would probably forex the growth rate as well.
That's how it works, right?
- Yeah, of course.
- And like it totally didn't work.
In fact, like I think the month after I left,
I had like my first down month
where like the revenue decreased.
And I was like, wait a minute, what's going on here?
How, that doesn't make any sense.
That's not fair.
So I think that also points at like,
there, yeah, you can definitely spend more hours
on something and it can be like the wrong things
or yeah, not doubling down on something
that's really working.
So, but overall, obviously you, yeah,
at some point, like just being able to like test out
more ideas is like really valuable.
And for that, like, yeah, I mean,
if you only have time to do support on your project,
that's really working well
and your full-time job is the rest of the,
how you spend your week, then yeah,
it feels like you should give yourself some time
to build features and maybe quit the job.
- Yeah, well, it's also an interesting point
about the structure because not everyone
is gonna get up at eight o'clock, sit at their desk
and they're gonna be like,
you know, I kind of can just do whatever.
And it's, you know, it's its own discipline,
its own learned skill.
- A hundred percent, yeah, yep.
I remember like one of the first weeks
after I was full-time on SimplePol,
I woke up in the morning and said,
well, the money's coming in, I don't need to work.
I don't have a boss.
And I just sat in bed and watched YouTube videos all day.
And then I just felt miserable at the end of the day.
Like I was like, this is supposed to feel great.
Why all this freedom I've wanted
and dreamt about for so long,
where like, why does it not feel great?
- Yeah, also feels like risk
and more different kinds of responsibility.
So SimplePol, the reason I said
it'd be worth talking about a little bit is,
you know, Slack's a popular platform
and this is based on Django, right?
- Yeah, so SimplePol is a full-on Django app.
- Yeah.
- And it's funny, sometimes people joke that,
I don't know if you've gone through
the official Django tutorial,
but in there you actually make a polls app in the browser.
Sometimes people joke, wait,
did you just turn this into like a Slack app?
And then--
- You productize the getting started tutorial, yeah.
(both laughing)
- Exactly.
But yeah, like it turned out that like polls
and then yeah, getting, you know,
your team more connected and Slack and more engaged
are like things people really care about.
So yeah, it came to the Slack,
SimplePol joined the Slack platform like at the perfect time
and has just been growing super well since then.
- Tell people a little bit about what it takes technically
to make a Slack app.
I mean, Slack is not built in Python as far as I know
and it's probably JavaScript and Electron
mostly the people interact with, right?
So what is the deal here?
- Yeah, it's actually super interesting.
So the way you build like a Slack app,
it's actually all backend based.
So when a user interacts in Slack,
Slack sends your app, your backend, like a JSON payload
saying like this user clicked this button
and then you can just send a JSON payload back saying,
all right, now show this message, now show this modal.
And they have their own JSON based block kit framework
where you can render different types of content.
So you don't actually have to think about JavaScript
or React or any of their stack at all.
It's basically all sending JSON payloads around
and calling various parts of the Slack API.
So you can build a Slack app in your favorite language,
any kind of exotic language if you wanted to.
But yeah, I love Python.
So I decided to build it in Python and Django.
So yeah, actually building Slack app
is a really like pleasant experience.
- Interesting.
What's the deployment backend story look like?
Is it a pass sort of thing, serverless?
- Yeah, so at the time it was Heroku.
Simplify was running on Heroku.
And then I think a few years ago we migrated it to AWS.
So now it's running on AWS and ECS.
- Nice, okay.
- Yeah.
- So Docker for the win, right on.
- Yeah, how does it work in Torque Python?
I'm curious, where are you deployed?
- It's all DigitalOcean.
And then I have one big like eight CPU server running,
I think 16 different Django apps, not Django,
- Oh, no way.
- No, sorry, Docker apps that are all doing like,
some of them share a database that's in Docker.
And some of them do sort of have their own
self-contained pair of like web app and database and so on.
But it's all Docker on one big server,
which it's fairly new for me and it's glorious.
It's glorious.
- That's awesome.
- Yeah.
- Very cool.
- So again, congrats on this, very, very neat.
Let's talk Colo.
So--
- Let's do it.
- I first came across this,
come across it independently twice.
Once,
when the Django chat guys recommended that I talk to you
'cause they're like, Will's doing cool stuff,
you should definitely talk to him.
He's doing a thing for VS Code is super cool.
But also, I can't remember, there's somebody on your team
whose social media profile I came across and I saw this
and I'm like, oh, this is pretty neat.
I think we even covered it on the Python Bytes podcast.
- Oh, no way.
- Let's see.
Yeah, sure.
In January we did.
So--
- Awesome.
- Yeah.
So that's what we talked about a little bit,
but this just looks like such a neat thing.
And I encourage people who may be interested in this
to visit colo.app because it's a super visual
sort of experience of understanding your code, right?
Would you agree?
- Yeah, I mean, 100%.
Yeah, that's a funny thought.
I hadn't really thought yet that, yeah,
a podcast is gonna be a hard way to describe
the visual beauty and magic that Colo can bring to your code.
But yeah, 100%, yeah.
So Colo very much started as the idea of,
hey, I should be able to see how my code actually flows.
I think all of us, as we build software,
as we write our Python code,
we have this kind of mental model
of how all the different functions fit together,
how a bit of data ends up from the beginning to the end.
It passes through maybe a bunch of functions,
it passes through a bunch of classes, a bunch of loops,
all the state gets modified.
And we have this kind of mental picture
of all of that in our head.
And the kind of very beginning of Colo,
the question I asked myself was like,
is there a way we can just visualize that?
Is there a way we can just actually print that out
onto a screen?
So if you go to colo.app,
it kind of looks like this funny sun chart
with lots of, like a kind of a sunny tree chart
with lots of nodes going from the center
and going off into the distance,
which I think is like, yeah, similar to like what folks
kind of might already have in their head
about like how the code flows.
Maybe another way to describe it is,
imagine like you enable a debugger
at the beginning of every function
and at the end of every function in your code,
and you print out like, what was the function name?
What were the input arguments?
What was the return value?
And then you arrange all of that in a graph
that then shows which function called which other function.
- Yeah, it almost looks like what you get out of profilers.
- Right. - You know,
where you say like, okay, this function took 20%,
but if you expand it out, I'll say,
well, it really spent 5% there, 10% there,
and then a bunch of it, and you can kind of traverse that.
- 100%, yeah. - But you're not,
I'm guessing you're not really interested
in how long it took,
although maybe you can probably get that out of it.
It's, the important is more,
what is the dependency?
What are the variables being passed
and like understanding individual behavior, right?
- Right, exactly. - So what do you think?
- Yeah, 100%, I think like, it's interesting
because Colo actually uses under the hood,
like a bunch of the Python profiling APIs,
and I think people often think of Colo as a profiler.
We do actually have a,
a like traditional profiling based chart,
which puts the timing at the center,
but you're absolutely right that,
like the focus of our like main chart,
the one that we're both looking at,
that has like this idea of the function overview
and like which function calls which,
the idea there is like absolutely the hierarchy
and seeing like giving yourself essentially that,
yeah, giving yourself that same mental model
that someone who's worked on a code base for three months
has in their head,
immediately like yourself by just looking at it.
So you can kind of, usually in the way these charts turn out
you can notice that there's like points of interest.
Like there's one function that has a lot of children.
So that clearly is coordinating like a bunch of the work
where you can see kind of similarities
in the structure of some of the sub trees.
So, you know, oh, okay, maybe that's like a loop
and it's the same thing happening a couple of times.
So you can essentially, I get this overview
and then it's fully interactive
and you can dive in to like what exactly is happening.
- Yeah, is it interactive?
So I can like click on these pieces and it'll pull them.
- Yeah, so we actually, and this is what's,
it'll be live by the time this podcast goes live.
We actually have a playground in the browser.
This is also super fun.
We can talk about this.
Well, let me drop you a link real quick.
This will be at play.colo.app.
So with this, yeah, this is super fun
because this is fully Python just running in the browser
using Pyodide and like web assembly.
- Oh, nice, okay.
- But yeah, so this is the fully visual version
where you can, yeah, it defaults to loading
like a simple Fibonacci algorithm.
And you can see like what the cola visualization
of Fibonacci looks like.
And you can actually edit the code
and see how it changes with your edits and all of that.
We have a couple other examples.
- Wow, the pandas one and the whack-a-mole one
are pretty intense.
They're pretty wild pictures.
They look like sort of Japanese fans or whatever.
- Yeah, exactly.
We once had a competition at a conference
to see who could make like the most fun looking algorithm
and visualize it with Colo.
But yeah, like the, yeah, it's fun.
Like visualizing code is really great.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
So this is super cool.
It's just all from scratch.
It's besides Pyodide here,
not like a VS Code in the browser.
- Yeah, I think it's using Monaco in this case
or CodeMirror, but otherwise this is all,
yeah, this is Pyodide and a little bit of React
to like pull kind of the data together.
But yeah, we're really, yeah.
It's otherwise homemade.
- And yeah, this is kind of like the,
kind of what Colo has been for like the past,
like two years or so has been this kind of side project
for SimplePol to help like just visualize
and understand code better.
The SimplePol code base, to be honest,
has grown so large that like there's parts of it
that I wrote like five years ago
that I don't understand anymore.
And it's like annoying to get back to that
and having to spend like a day
to re-familiarize myself with everything.
It's a lot nicer to just like,
to actually kind of explain like end to end how it works.
You install, like in a Django project,
you install Colo as a middleware.
And then as you just browse and use your Django app
and make requests, traces get saved.
So Colo records these traces.
They get actually get saved in a local SQLite database.
And then you can view the traces,
which includes the visualization,
but also like lots of other data.
Like you can actually see in the version you have there,
like we show every single function call,
like the inputs and outputs for each function call.
So that main idea of Colo is to like really show you
everything that happened in your code.
So in a Django app, that would be like the request,
the response, like all the headers,
every single function call, input and output,
outbound requests, SQL queries as well.
So the really the goal is to show you everything.
And then you can view these stored traces
either through VS Code or,
and this is also will be live by the time
this episode goes live through like a web middleware version
which is a bit similar to Django debug toolbar.
Not sure if you've played around much with Django debug.
- Yeah, a little bit.
Yeah, those things are actually pretty impressive.
Right, I played out with that one and the pyramid one.
And you can see more than I think you would reasonably
expect from just a little thing on the side of your web app.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's like really, and that's very much our goal too,
like very kind of deep, deep insight.
And, but in our minds, this is almost like a bit
like old news, like we've been using this
for like a few years basically.
And then at some point, like last year,
we started playing around with this idea of like,
okay, so we have this trace that has information
about like pretty much everything that happened
in like a request.
Can we, is there any way we could use that
to solve this like reasonably large pain point for us
which is like writing tests?
I'm actually curious, do you enjoy writing tests?
- No, I'll tell you what I used to actually.
I used to really enjoy writing tests.
I used to enjoy thinking a lot about it.
And then as the projects would get bigger,
I'm like, you know, this is,
these tests don't really cover
what I need them to cover anymore.
And they're kind of dragging it down.
And then, you know, the thing that really
kind of knocked it out for me is I'd have like teammates
and they wouldn't care about the tests at all.
So they would break the tests
or just write a bunch of code without tests.
And I felt kind of like a parent cleaning up after kids.
And you're like, why is it so,
can we just pick up, like, why are there dishes here?
And they're just going around and like,
this is not what I want to do.
Like, I want to just write software
and I understand the value of tests, of course.
But at the same time,
I feel like maybe higher order integration tests often,
for me at least, serve more value
because it's like I could write 20 little unit tests
or I could write two integration tests.
- I'm actually completely with you on that.
- Okay. - Yeah.
- I think the bang for the buck of integration tests
are like great, like really, really useful.
Like, yeah, I think you can almost think of tests
as having like two purposes.
One being like, well, actually,
I think this would be too simple an explanation.
Let me not make grand claims about all the uses of tests.
I think the most, the use of it that most people are after
is this idea of like,
what I've built isn't gonna break by accident.
- Yeah.
- Like, you want confidence that any future change you make
doesn't impact a bunch of unrelated stuff
that it's not supposed to impact.
I think that's what most people are after with tests.
And I think for that specific desired result,
like integration tests are the way to go.
And there's some cool writing about this from,
there is a, yeah, I wrote a little blog post
about Colo's test generation abilities.
And in there, I linked to a post from Kent C. Dodds
from the JavaScript community who has a great post about,
I think it's called,
write tests, not too many, mostly integration.
Kind of after this idea of like,
eat not too much, mostly vegetables.
I think that's the-
- Yeah, exactly, exactly, yeah.
- I'm a big fan of that.
And actually, it's interesting,
speaking to a bunch of folks over the past,
like year about tests.
I think a lot of people,
a lot of engineers think about writing tests as vegetables.
And obviously some people love vegetables.
And some of us love writing tests.
But it seems like for a lot of folks,
it's kind of like a obviously necessary part
of creating great software,
but it's maybe not like the most fun part of our job.
- Right.
Or you pick up some project, you're a consultant,
or you're taking over some open source project,
and you're like, this has no tests.
- Right, yeah, yeah.
- It's kind of like running a linter.
And it says there's a thousand errors.
You're like, well, we're not gonna do that.
- Yeah.
- We're just not gonna run the linter against it,
'cause it's just too messed up at this point, right?
- It's interesting you mentioned the picking up
like a project with no tests,
because I think within the next three months,
we're not quite there yet,
but I think in the next three months
with Colo's test generation abilities,
we'll have a thing where, yeah,
all we need is a Python code base to get started.
And then we can bring that to like a really respectable
level of code coverage just by using Colo.
- Okay, how?
- Cool, let's talk about the how.
So yeah, I was kind of talking about this a second ago.
I'm sorry, it was just a helicopter flying by.
- Yeah, I don't hear it, it's fine.
You're good, you got a good mic.
- Nice, yeah, so I was kind of describing a second ago
how like we kind of, you know,
SimplePol has tons of integration tests.
SimplePol actually is about 80,000 lines of application code
not including migrations and like config files.
And then it's about 100,000 lines of tests.
And most of that is integration tests.
So SimplePol very well tested lots of,
yeah, really mostly integration tests,
but it is always a bit of a chore to like write them.
So we started thinking about like,
hmm, this like Colo tracing we're doing,
can that help us with making tests somehow?
And then we started experimenting with it.
And like to our surprise, it's actually, yeah.
I'm still sometimes surprised that it actually works.
But basically the idea is that if you have a trace
that has, that captures everything in the request,
you can kind of invert it to build a integration test.
So let me give an example of what that means.
So the biggest challenge we found
with creating integration tests
is actually the test data setup.
So getting your application into the right shape
before you can send a request to it
or before you can call a certain function,
that's like kind of the hardest part.
Writing the asserts is almost like easy or even like fun,
but like- - Right.
There's the three A's of unit testing.
Range, assert, and act.
Wait, arrange, act, and assert.
- Exactly, yeah.
- The first and the third one
that you kind of have data on, right?
- Exactly, yeah.
So we're like, wait a second.
We actually can like kind of extract this,
like the act, so like the setting,
sorry, the arrange, setting up the data,
the act, like actually making the HTTP request,
and then the assert, like to ensure the status change
or that the request go to 200 or something.
We actually have the data for this.
And it's reasonably straightforward.
Like if you capture in, you know, just your like normal,
like imagine you have a local to-do app
and you browse like a to-do kind of demo, simple to-do app,
and you browse to the homepage
and the homepage maybe lists the to-dos.
And if you've got Colo enabled,
then Colo will have captured the request, right?
So like the request went to the homepage
and it returned to 200.
So that's already like two things we can now turn into code
in our integration test.
So first step being, well,
I guess this is the act and the assert
in the sense that the assert is the 200,
and then the act is firing off a request to the homepage.
Now the tricky bit,
and this is where it gets the most fun, is the arrange.
So if we just put those two things into our test,
in our two imaginary test,
there wouldn't have been any to-dos there, right?
So it's actually not an interesting test yet.
But in your local version where the trace was recorded,
you actually had maybe like three to-dos
already in your database.
Does that make sense so far?
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
- So on the homepage,
like your to-do app might make a SQL query
to like select all the to-dos
or all the to-dos for the currently logged in user.
So, and then Kolo would store that SQL query,
would store that select,
and would also store actually what data
the database returned.
This is actually something where,
yeah, Kolo goes beyond a lot of the existing
kind of like debugging tooling that might exist,
like actually showing exactly what data
the database returned in a given SQL query.
But imagine we get like a single to-do return, right?
We now know that to replicate this like trace in our test,
we need to start by seeding that to-do into the database.
So that's where like the trace inversion comes in.
If like a request starts with a select of like
the to-do table,
then the first thing that needs to happen
in the integration test is actually a,
like creating like an insert into the database
for that to-do.
And now when you fire off the request to the homepage,
it actually goes through your real code path
where like an actual to-do gets loaded
and gets printed out onto the page.
So that's like the most basic kind of example of like,
how can you turn like a locally captured trace of a request
that like made a SQL query and returned 200
into like an integration test.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
You know, one of the big,
one of the things that makes me wanna write fewer unit tests
or not write a unit test in a certain case
is I can test given using mocking,
given my, let's say SQLAlchemy or Beanie or whatever,
Django ORM model,
it theoretically matches the database.
I can do some stuff, set some values and check and that,
that's all good.
But in practice, if the shape,
if the schema in the database
doesn't match the shape of my object,
the system freaks out and crashes and says,
"Well, that's not gonna work, right?
There's no way."
And so it doesn't matter how good I mock it out.
It has to go end to end before I feel very good about it.
Oh yeah, okay, it's gonna really, really work, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
I feel like- - It's an interesting story
like you're saying to like,
let's actually see if we can just create the data,
but like let it run all the way through, right?
- And no, I'm totally with you.
And I think, yeah, I've seen,
I've often seen like unit tests pass and say,
I mean, there's like lots of memes about this, right?
How like unit tests say everything is good,
but the server is down, like, how's that possible?
I think in Django world,
it's reasonably common to write integration tests like this,
as in like the actual database gets hit.
You have this idea of like the Django test client,
which sends like a, you know, real in air quotes,
HTTP request through the entire Django stack,
as opposed to doing the more unit test approach.
So- - Yeah, so it hits the routes,
it hits like all of the,
that sort of stuff all the way in.
- It's the route. - And the template, yeah.
- Yep, yep.
And then at the end,
you can assert based on like the content of the response,
or you can check, like,
imagine if we go back to the to-do example,
if we're testing like the add to-do endpoint,
or form submission,
then you could make a, like a database query at the end.
And Kolo actually does this as well,
because like, again,
we know like that you inserted a to-do in your request,
so we can actually make an assert.
This is a different example of the trace inversion.
If there's an insert in your request that you captured,
then we know at the end of the integration test,
you wanna assert that this row now exists in the database.
So yeah, you can assert at the very end to say,
does this row actually exist in the database now?
So it's a very nice kind of reasonably end-to-end,
but still integration test.
It's not like a brittle click around in the browser
and kind of hope for the best kind of thing.
It's like, yeah, yeah.
As we said at the beginning,
I think like integration tests just get you great bang
for your buck.
- They really do.
It's like the 80/20 rule of unit testing for sure.
- Yup, yup.
And yeah.
- So is this all algorithmic or?
- Yup, great question.
- Is it?
- Yeah.
- Is it LLMs?
Like how much VC funding are you looking for?
Like, you know,
like if you got the LLMs in there,
like coming out of the woodwork.
I'm just kidding.
No, how does this happen?
- Yeah, so it's actually all algorithmic
and rule-based at the moment.
So this idea of a select becomes like a,
like an insert and an insert becomes like a select assert.
We were surprised how far we could get with just rules.
And the benefit we have is that we kind of have this like
full-sized SimplePol Django code base to play around with.
And yeah, like generating integration tests in SimplePol
just like fully works.
There's a bunch of tweaks we like had to make to,
yeah, as soon as I guess you work in kind of like
outside of a demo example,
you want like time mocking and HTTP mocking,
and you want to use your like factory boy factories.
And like, maybe you have a custom unit test,
like base class and all of this.
But yeah, it like actually, it actually works now.
I gave a talk at DjangoCon Europe last year,
and there was kind of like,
it's kind of like a bit of a wow moment in the audience
where, yeah, you just click generate test,
and it generates you like a hundred line integration test,
and the test actually passes.
So that was like, yeah, people just started clapping,
which was a great feeling.
I'm still a bit surprised that it works on it,
but yeah, no LLM at all.
I do think like LLMs could probably make these tests
like even better, or you know how I was saying a second ago,
like in three months, we could go take a code base
from like zero test coverage to maybe like 60%, 80%.
I imagine if we made use of LLMs,
that would help make that happen.
- Yeah, yeah, you could talk to it about like,
well, these things aren't covered.
- Right.
- What can we do to cover them?
- I don't know if you maybe could do fully, fully automated,
just push the button and let it generate it,
but it could also be like a conversational,
not a conversation, sort of a guided,
let's get the rest of the test,
you know, like, okay, we're down to 80,
we've got 80%, but there's the last bit a little tricky,
like what ones are missing?
All right, so how do you think we could do this?
Is that about, no, no, you need to,
that's not really the kind of data we're gonna pass,
I don't know, it seems something like that, right?
- I really liked that.
I had not thought about like a conversation
as a way to generate tests, but that makes so much sense.
- Right, and kind of bringing the developer
along with them.
- Yeah, exactly.
- If it's gotten too hard or something, you know?
- Yeah, there's something cool about just clicking a button
and see how much code coverage you could get to,
but yeah, chatting to it.
I think also, honestly, like so far,
like our test generation logic is a bit of a black box.
It just kind of like works
until the point where like it doesn't.
So we're actually kind of in the process
of like shining a bit more of a light
into like essentially the like internal data model
that Colo keeps track of to know what the database state
should be like in this arrange part
of the integration test.
And yeah, we're actually like in the process of like,
yeah, talking to a bunch of users who are already using it
and also finding like companies who want
to increase their test coverage
or who have problems with their testing
and want to improve that and kind of working closely
with them to make that happen.
Yeah, and yeah, that's kind of a huge focus for us
as we figure out like, how do we wanna monetize Colo?
Like so far, Colo has just been kind of supported
by SimplePool as a side project,
but we're kind of making it real,
making it its own business.
So yeah, and we think the test generation
is gonna play a big part in that.
- Right, like that could be a certainly
a premium team feature sort of thing.
- Exactly, yeah.
So-- - Enterprise.
Enterprise version comes with auto testing.
- Yeah, exactly, something like that, yeah.
So yeah, I mean, if there's anyone listening
and like they're keen to increase their code coverage,
please email me, maybe we can leave my email
in the notes or something like that.
- Yeah, I'll put your contact info
in the show notes for sure.
- It's, yeah, it's actually really nice.
It's just w@colo.app.
- Oh, very nice.
- So yeah, if anyone's listening
and wants to kind of like increase their code coverage
or has a lot of code bases that have zero coverage
that would benefit from getting
to like some level of coverage,
we'd love to help you and talk to you.
Even if the solution doesn't like involve using Colo,
just really, really keen to talk to anyone
about like Python tests and what can be done there.
So yeah, please hit me up.
- Awesome, yeah, I'll definitely put some details
in the show notes for that.
All right, so I have some questions as well.
- Please, yes.
- Right here, I'm looking at the webpage
and the angle bracket title is Colo for Django.
But in the playground thing you sent me,
it was on plain Python code.
It was on algorithms.
It was on pandas, which I thought was pretty interesting
how much you could see inside pandas.
Makes me wonder, you know, if you look at the web frameworks,
there's two or three more that are pretty popular out there
and they all support middleware.
- Yeah, 100%.
So Colo kind of started as like this like side project
for our Django app.
And I think that that's why we kind of went there first,
kind of the audience we know best.
- The dog food as well, yeah.
- Exactly, dog food.
Lily, who's an engineer on the team is,
and has been building kind of a lot of like, yeah,
a lot of the Python side of Colo
is like a core contributor to Django.
So Django is like really where we're home.
And to be honest, I think when building a new product,
it's kind of nice to keep the audience
somewhat small initially,
keep like building for very specific needs
as opposed to going like very wide, very early.
So that was kind of very much the intention.
But there's no reason why Colo can support Flask, FastAPI,
or the scientific Python stack.
Yeah, like as you can see in the playground,
it does totally work on plain Python.
It's really just a matter of, yeah,
like honestly like FastAPI support
would probably be like a 40 line config file in--
- Yeah, exactly.
- In like our code.
And there's actually, yeah, we're thinking of ways to,
we're thinking of ways to just make that
actually a bit more pluggable as well.
There's only like so many things
we can reasonably support well ourselves.
But to get like even, oh, sorry, go on.
- I was just gonna say, if somebody else out there
has an open source project,
they want it to have good support for this, right?
Like, hey, I run HTTPX or I run Lightstar or whatever,
and I want mine to look good here too, right?
- Yeah, no, no, totally.
So the thing you can do already today
is there's a little bit of config you can pass in.
And actually, if you look back on the pandas example,
you'll see this.
By default, Colo actually doesn't show you library code
if you use it in your own code base,
but you can tell it, show me everything that happened,
like literally everything.
And then it will do that for you.
So in this example you're looking at,
or if anyone's looking at the playground,
if you look at the pandas example,
it'll say like include everything in pandas.
And that'll give you like a lot more context.
The thinking there is that most people don't really need,
like the issues you're gonna be looking at
will be in your own code
or in your own company's code base.
You don't really need to look at the abstractions,
but you totally can.
But yeah, to answer the question,
like we have this like internal version of a plugin system
where yeah, like anyone could add FastAPI support
or like a great insight into PyTorch or what have you.
The way it all works technically really
is it's totally built on top of this Python API
called set profile.
- Yeah. - I'm not sure.
Have you come across this before?
It's a bit similar to set trace actually.
- Yeah, I think so.
I think I've done it for some C profile things before.
I'm not too sure. - Nice.
- Yeah. - Yeah, it's a really neat API
to be honest, because Python calls back to your,
like the callback that you register
on every function, enter and exit.
And then Colo essentially looks at all of these functions,
enters and exits and decides which ones are interesting.
So the matter of like supporting say FastAPI
is basically just telling Colo,
these are the FastAPI functions that are interesting.
This is the FastAPI function
for like an HTTP request that was served.
This is the HTTP response, or similarly for SQL alchemy.
This is the function where the query was actually executed
and sent to the database.
This is the variable which has the query result.
Like there's a little bit more to it
and I'm definitely like, yeah, generalizing,
but it's kind of like in principle, it's as simple as that.
It's like telling Colo, here's the bits of code
in a given library that are interesting.
Now just kind of like display that
and make that available for the test generation.
- Yeah, excellent.
Yeah, I totally agree with you that getting focused,
it probably gets you some more full attention
from the Django audience.
And the Django audience is quite a large
and influential group in the Python web space.
So that makes a ton of sense,
especially since you're using it.
By the way, it was Lily's Mastodon profile,
I believe that I ran across that I first discovered Colo from
- That would make sense.
- Of all the places, yeah.
Or a post from her or something like that.
- That's awesome.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, so let's talk about a couple other things here.
Yeah, so for people who haven't seen it yet,
like you get quite a bit of information.
So if you see like the get request,
you actually see the JSON response
that was returned out of that request
and it integrates kind of into your editor directly, right?
If you've seen Code Lens before,
it's kind of like Code Lens, right?
- Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, this is another thing which I think
is pretty novel with Colo.
Like I think it's reasonably common
for existing debugging tools to show you like,
oh yeah, this is the headers for the request
or this is like the response status code.
But especially working with the Slack API in SimplePol,
you're constantly looking at payloads
and what were the values and what are you returning?
- You don't directly, in production,
you don't directly get to even make those
or receive those requests, right?
There's some like system in Slack
who was like chatting with your thing.
You're like, well, what is happening here, right?
Not that you actually run this in there, but you know.
- I mean, it's funny you mentioned this
because there is one experiment we wanna run
of kind of actually enabling these extremely deep
and detailed Colo traces in production.
We haven't explored this too much yet
and I think we're gonna focus a little bit more
on the test generation, but you could imagine like a user
who's using, who's on the Talk Python site
and they've got some incredibly niche error
that no one else is like encountering
and you've tried to reproduce it, but you can't reproduce it.
Maybe there's a little bit of information
in like your logging system, but it's just not enough
and you keep adding more logging
and you keep adding more logging and it's just not helping.
Like imagine a world where you can say,
just for that user, like enable Colo
and enable like these really deep traces.
And then you can see whenever the user next interacts,
like the value for every single variable
for every single code path that executed for that user.
That's just like, yeah.
I think one of our users described
as like a debugger on steroids.
- Yeah, it's pretty interesting.
Sounds a little bit like what you get with Sentry
and some of those things,
but maybe also a little bit different.
So, you could do something like,
here's a dear user with problem.
Here's a URL.
If you click this, it'll set a cookie in your browser
and then all subsequent behavior, it just hits on it.
You know what I mean?
It's like recording it.
- Exactly.
- That'd be pretty interesting.
- Fully debug your, yeah, I think it makes sense
in the case, like if a user,
it could even be an automated support thing, right?
Like if, I think a couple of sites have this
where you can like do like a debug dump
before you submit your support ticket.
This is almost like that.
And then as an engineer who's tasked with,
you know, digging into that user's bug,
you don't have to start with like piecing together.
What was this variable at this time
when they made that request three days ago?
You like, you can just see it.
- How about this?
If an error ever encounters an exception on your site,
you just set the cookie.
- Right.
- Everything else they do is now just recorded
until you turn it off.
- Oh my God, you're giving me so many good ideas.
- That'd be fun, right?
- I'm gonna start writing this stuff down.
- Hey, let's record it.
It'll be fine.
(laughing)
- That's awesome.
- Yeah, there's a bunch of stuff that's interesting.
People can check it on the site.
It's all good.
However, let's, we talked a little bit
about the production thing.
Like another thing you could do for production,
this requires both a decent amount of traffic
and maybe you could actually pull this off
on just a single server, but you could do like,
let's just run this for 1% of the traffic
so that you don't kill the system,
but you get, if that's why I see you have enough traffic,
it's like statistically significant sampling
of what people do without actually recording,
a million requests a day or something.
- 100%.
I think there's really something there.
Or like, I mean, how cool would it be if,
yeah, honestly, I could go on about this whole idea
of like runtime data and like improving software
understanding for days, because I just think like,
it's really this like missing layer, right?
Like all of us constantly imagine like what is,
like we play computer looking at our code,
imagining what the values can be, but like, yeah.
Say you're looking at some complex function in production
and you want to understand how it works.
Like how useful would it be if you could see like the 10,
the last 10 times it was called,
like what were the values going into it
and what were the values coming out of it?
Like that would be, I just think like,
why do we not have this already?
Like why does your editor not show you
for every single function in the code base?
Like give examples of like how it's actually used
like in production.
- Yeah, yeah.
And then use those to generate unit tests.
And if there's an error, use that to generate the edge case,
like the negative case, not the positive case.
- Exactly.
- There you go.
All right.
- It's all like kind of hanging together.
Like, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
Once you have the data, you have interesting options.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so business model.
- This is not, this,
I maybe should have started sooner with this,
but it's not entirely open source.
There may be a little bits and pieces of it,
but in general, it's not open source.
- That's correct.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
- I'm not putting that out there as a negative, right?
This looks like a super powerful tool
that people can use to write code and that's fine.
- No, for sure.
Like, yeah, I think the open source question
is super interesting.
Like I think it's always been like something
we've thought about or considered.
I think there is, yeah, with developer tools,
I think business models are always super interesting
and we wanna make sure that we can have a business model
for Colo and like run it as like a sustainable thing
as opposed to it just being like a simple poll side project
kind of indefinitely.
Be great if Colo could like support itself
and yeah, have a business model.
I think that's how it can like really
fulfill its potential in a way.
But that's not to say that like Colo
won't ever be open source.
Like I think there's a lot to be said for open sourcing it.
I think especially like the capturing of the traces
is maybe something like I could see us open sourcing.
I think the open source community is fantastic.
I do also think it's not like a thing you get for free.
Right?
Like as soon as you say, hey, we're open source,
you open yourself up to contributions, right?
And to like the community actually getting involved
and that's great, but it also takes time.
And I think like that's a path I would like to go down
when we're a little bit clearer on like
what Colo actually is and like where it's valuable,
if that makes sense.
- Yeah, yeah, sure.
- If it turns out that no one cares about like what,
how like how to visualize code,
then like that's a great like learning for us to have made.
But I'd rather get there without like a lot of work
in the middle that we could have kind of avoided
if that makes sense.
So like it's, it feels like once we have a better sense
of the shape of Colo and what the business model
actually looks like, then we can be a bit more,
yeah, we can invest into open source a little bit more.
But to be honest, like based on how everything's looking
right now, like I would not be surprised at all
if like big chunks, if like Colo becomes open core
or big chunks of it are like open source.
Yeah.
- Yeah, it makes sense to me.
- It is fully free at the moment.
So I should, that's worth calling out.
Like it's, there's no cost or anything.
You can also like, you know, you download the Python package
and guess what?
You can look at all of the code.
Like it actually is all of theirs.
It is all kind of visible.
- Yeah, yeah.
And I, that kind of leads into the next question is,
you know, I've never used GitHub Copilot
and a few of those other things because it's like,
here, check this box to allow us to upload all of your code
and maybe your access keys and everything else
that's interesting.
So we can, one, train our models and two,
you know, give you some answers.
And that just always felt a little bit off to me.
What's the story with the data?
- Yeah, Greg, I mean, so at the moment,
Colo is like entirely like a local product, right?
So it's all local, like you don't have to,
yeah, you can get like all of the visualization,
everything just by using local Colo in VS Code.
We do have a way to like upload traces
and share them like with a colleague.
This is actually also something I think is like,
kind of playing with the idea of like writing a little like
Colo manifesto, like what are the things that we believe in?
One of them that I believe in,
and this goes back to the whole like
runtime layer on top of code.
And like, there's this whole dimension,
this like third dimension to code
that we're all simulating in our heads.
I think like it should totally be possible
to not just like link to a snippet of code,
like on GitHub, but it should be possible to have a like,
link like a URL to a specific execution of code,
like a specific function and actually talk about that.
It's kind of wild to me that we don't have this
at the moment, like you can't send a link to a colleague
saying, "Hey, look at this execution.
That looks a bit weird."
Right?
- Yeah, we ran this in continuous integration
and it crashed, but I understand.
Let's look at the exact.
- Right.
You can link to like CI runs,
you can link to like sentry errors,
but like if you're just seeing something
slightly weird locally, or like even something
slightly like weird in production where there's no area,
you can't really like link to that.
Anyway, like this is kind of a roundabout way of
me saying that like, I think that totally should be a thing
that you should be able to link like generically
to like a execution of a function
or an execution of a request.
And like that would totally have to live somewhere, right?
So this is where there's some idea of like
Colo Cloud comes in and this is where you could like
connect your repository and then Colo would like,
as part of that, you know, just like GitHub does
have access to your code and like show you the code
in like the Colo Cloud.
So I think there's definitely like useful things
that are possible there, but at the moment,
it's a fully local experience.
Like your code doesn't ever leave your system.
You can, if you want to like upload traces
and then Colo stores the like trace data,
not the code, just the trace data.
But yeah, very local experience right now.
- Okay, yeah, a little SQLite database.
- Exactly, yep.
- Yeah, SQLite's pretty awesome.
- Yeah, it's an incredible piece of software.
- Yeah, it really, really is.
All right, let's close out our conversation here
with a little bit of a request from Michael.
Right now it's VS Code only.
Any chance for some PyCharm in there?
- Yeah, so this is our top request, like PyCharm support.
And we've decided, yeah, like super small team,
like we want to kind of support everyone,
but we've been working very heavily actually
the past few months on a web-based version,
which is, I'm happy to say like very much nearing completion
and there's a few bits and pieces where like,
it's really nice to be integrated super deeply
into the editor, like the code lenses and all of that.
And I think there's a chance we'll have that
for PyCharm eventually as well.
But we actually found that like,
they're building out this web version.
There's a few things that are actually much nicer
when you have the full control over the UI
in terms of like browsing around a trace,
highlighting little bits of code.
So for example, we in Colo, like a given function call,
we call a frame and you can look at a given frame,
both in VS Code, but also in the web version
and see the code and see all of the data
that passed through the code.
But something we can do in the web version,
we can't do in VS Code is actually show
where the current function was called from
and actually show like a preview of that code.
In VS Code, you can't really show like--
- Yeah, you can layer multiple files together
or different-- - Exactly.
- Yeah, exactly.
- So we actually have like, there's actually a lot of,
like I was surprised by how many different novel
like kind of ways we had in the web
that we just never even considered
with like a direct editor integration
in terms of displaying this runtime data.
So like long story short, like you want
a PyCharm integration, let me give you something
even better, a web version.
- So would that work like you run a certain command
or something when you run your web app
and then it just generates the SQL lite file
and then you could just explore it with a web view
or what are you--
- Yeah, it's actually kind of cooler than that.
So if you're using Django or in the future,
like other things with a typical middleware,
you would just like go to your,
you would just go to localhost 8000.
- Oh, I see.
- That's cool.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Kind of like you do for Open API docs.
- Yep, exactly, yep.
And then the whole experience is just there.
If you're not using a middleware,
we'll have a command like colo serve or something like that.
And that'll host the same experience for you.
- Nice, yeah.
Just make sure it's off by default
or it only responds on localhost or something like that.
You know, like--
- Yeah, exactly.
- Don't let people ship it on accident.
- Yeah, yeah.
- That would be bad news.
- No production use of this.
- Yeah, I mean, people already know about the Django
debug settings, but right,
I guess you could sort of layer onto that, right?
Probably.
- Yeah, I think we actually do that at the moment,
but yeah, it's worth remembering.
- I know, I just think, you know, like,
well, this is really cool to explore.
- 100%.
- CNN.com is awesome.
Look what it's doing.
- Look at all these requests and all this.
- Yeah, exactly.
- 100%.
- Yeah.
- Oh, and the API key is so interesting.
Anyway, that's a bit of a side conversation.
Let's just, let's wrap it up with final call action.
People are interested.
What do they do?
- Yeah, go to colo.app and check it out.
We have a playground link there, play.colo.app.
Easiest way to kind of see what Colo is and what Colo does.
But we'll say the most powerful way
to actually see Colo in action
is to use it on your own code base.
So seeing the visualization
and the test generation capabilities is just like,
yeah, the most useful when you use it
on your own code base.
So hopefully the playground can entice that a little bit.
And yeah, really the main,
most important thing for us right now is, yeah,
chatting to folks who want to increase their test coverage,
want to like build automated testing
as part of their workflow.
And yeah, work very closely with you to make that happen.
So if that's you, please email me at w@colo.app.
- You need that pause for the W, that's right.
The two at's, awesome.
Will, thanks for being on the show.
Congrats on both of your projects.
They look really neat.
- Thanks so much for having me.
Yeah, so excited to have been on.
- Yeah, you bet, bye.